README.md, before:

# meta-renesas

This is a Yocto build layer(version:dunfell) that provides support for the RZ/G2 Group of 64bit Arm-based MPUs from Renesas Electronics.
Currently the following boards and MPUs are supported:

- Board: EK874 / MPU: R8A774C0 (RZ/G2E)
- Board: HIHOPE-RZG2M / MPU: R8A774A1 (RZ/G2M v1.3) and R8A774A3 (RZ/G2M v3.0)
- Board: HIHOPE-RZG2N / MPU: R8A774B1 (RZG2N)
- Board: HIHOPE-RZG2H / MPU: R8A774E1 (RZG2H)
- Board: RZG2L SMARC Evaluation Kit / MPU: R9A07G044L (RZ/G2L)
- Board: RZG2LC SMARC Evaluation Kit / MPU: R9A07G044C (RZ/G2LC)
- Board: RZG2UL SMARC Evaluation Kit / MPU: R9A07G043U (RZ/G2UL)
- Board: RZV2L SMARC Evaluation Kit / MPU: R9A07G054L (RZ/V2L)
- Board: RZV2L Development Evaluation Kit / MPU: R9A07G054L (RZ/V2L)

## Patches

To contribute to this layer you should email patches to renesas-rz@renesas.com. Please send .patch files as email attachments, not embedded in the email body.

## Dependencies

This layer depends on:

    URI: git://git.yoctoproject.org/poky
    layers: meta, meta-poky, meta-yocto-bsp
    branch: dunfell
    revision: bba323389749ec3e306509f8fb12649f031be152
    (tag: dunfell-23.0.14)
    (Need to cherry-pick a commit: git cherry-pick 9e444)

    URI: git://git.openembedded.org/meta-openembedded
    layers: meta-oe, meta-python, meta-multimedia
    branch: dunfell
    revision: ec978232732edbdd875ac367b5a9c04b881f2e19
    
    URI: http://git.yoctoproject.org/cgit.cgi/meta-gplv2/
    layers: meta-gplv2
    branch: dunfell
    revision: 60b251c25ba87e946a0ca4cdc8d17b1cb09292ac

    (Optional: core-image-qt)
    URI: https://github.com/meta-qt5/meta-qt5.git
    layers: meta-qt5
    revision: c1b0c9f546289b1592d7a895640de103723a0305

    (Optional: Docker)
    URI: https://git.yoctoproject.org/git/meta-virtualization
    layers: meta-virtualization
    branch: dunfell
    revision: c5f61e547b90aa8058cf816f00902afed9c96f72

## Build Instructions

Assume that $WORK is the current working directory.
The following instructions require a Poky installation (or equivalent).

Below git configuration is required:
```bash
    $ git config --global user.email "you@example.com"
    $ git config --global user.name "Your Name"
```

Download proprietary graphics and multimedia drivers from Renesas, include:
- proprietary_mmp.tar.gz
- vspmfilter.tar.xz
(Graphic drivers are required for Wayland. Multimedia drivers are optional)

You can get all Yocto build environment from Renesas, or download all Yocto related public source to prepare the build environment as below.
```bash
    $ git clone https://git.yoctoproject.org/git/poky
    $ cd poky
    $ git checkout dunfell-23.0.14
    $ git cherry-pick 9e444
    $ cd ..
    $     
    $ git clone https://github.com/openembedded/meta-openembedded
    $ cd meta-openembedded
    $ git checkout ec978232732edbdd875ac367b5a9c04b881f2e19
    $ cd ..
    $    
    $ git clone https://git.yoctoproject.org/git/meta-gplv2
    $ cd meta-gplv2 
    $ git checkout 60b251c25ba87e946a0ca4cdc8d17b1cb09292ac
    $
    $ git clone  https://github.com/renesas-rz/meta-renesas.git
    $ cd meta-renesas
    $ git checkout <tag>
    $ cd ..
    $
    $ git clone  https://github.com/meta-qt5/meta-qt5.git
    $ cd meta-qt5
    $ git checkout -b tmp c1b0c9f546289b1592d7a895640de103723a0305
    $ cd ..
    $
    $ git clone  https://git.yoctoproject.org/git/meta-virtualization -b dunfell
    $ cd meta-virtualization
    $ git checkout c5f61e547b90aa8058cf816f00902afed9c96f72
    $ cd ..
```
\<tag\> can be selected in any tags of meta-renesas.
Now the latest version is **BSP-3.0.x**

[Optional] If you need GPU/Codec support, or build Weston image, this step helps to copy them to build environment. Copy file proprietary_mmp.tar.gz and vspmfilter.tar.xz to $WORK and do below commands.
```bash
    $ tar -xf proprietary_mmp.tar.gz
    $ cd proprietary_mmp
    $ ./copy_gfx_mmp.sh ../meta-renesas
    $ cd ..
    $
    $ cp vspmfilter.tar.xz meta-renesas/recipes-common/recipes-multimedia/gstreamer/gstreamer1.0-plugin-vspmfilter
    $ 
```

Initialize a build using the 'oe-init-build-env' script in Poky. e.g.:
```bash
    $ source poky/oe-init-build-env
```

Prepare default configuration files. :
```bash
    $ cp $WORK/meta-renesas/docs/template/conf/<board>/*.conf ./conf/
```
\<board\> : smarc-rzg2l, rzg2l-dev

Build the target file system image using bitbake:
```bash
    $ bitbake core-image-<target>
```
\<target\>:bsp, weston, qt

After completing the images for the target machine will be available in the output
directory _'tmp/deploy/images/\<supported board name\>'_.

Images generated:
* Image (generic Linux Kernel binary image file)
* DTB for target machine
* core-image-\<target\>-\<machine name\>.tar.bz2 (rootfs tar+bzip2)
* core-image-\<target\>-\<machine name\>.ext4  (rootfs ext4 format)

## Build Instructions for SDK

Use bitbake -c populate_sdk for generating the toolchain SDK:
For 64-bit target SDK (aarch64):
```bash
    $ bitbake core-image-weston -c populate_sdk
```
The SDK can be found in the output directory _'tmp/deploy/sdk'_

    poky-glibc-x86_64-core-image-weston-aarch64-toolchain-x.x.sh

Usage of toolchain SDK: Install the SDK to the default: _/opt/poky/x.x_
For 64-bit target SDK:
```bash
    $ sh poky-glibc-x86_64-core-image-weston-aarch64-toolchain-x.x.sh
```
For 64-bit application use environment script in _/opt/poky/x.x_
```bash
    $ source /opt/poky/x.x/environment-setup-aarch64-poky-linux
```

## Build configs

It is possible to change some build configs as below:
* GPLv3: choose to not allow, or allow, GPLv3 packages
  * **Non-GPLv3 (default):** not allow GPLv3 license. All recipes that has GPLv3 license will be downgrade to older version that has alternative license (done by meta-gplv2). In this setting customer can ignore the risk of strict license GPLv3
  ```
  INCOMPATIBLE_LICENSE = "GPLv3 GPLv3+"
  ```
  * Allow-GPLv3: allow GPLv3 license. If user is fine with strict copy-left license GPLv3, can use this setting to get newer software version.
  ```
  #INCOMPATIBLE_LICENSE = "GPLv3 GPLv3+"
  ```
* CIP Core: choose the version of CIP Core to build with. CIP Core are software packages that are maintained for long term by CIP community. You can select the value "1" or "0" for CIP_CORE variable
  ```
  CIP_CORE = "1"
  ```
* QT Demo: choose QT5 Demonstration to build with core-image-qt. QT5 Demos are some applications to demonstrate QT5 framework.
  * Unset QT_DEMO (default): all QT5 Demos are not built with core-image-qt.
  ```
  #QT_DEMO = "1"
  ```
  * Allow QT_DEMO: all QT5 Demos are built and included in core-image-qt.
  ```
  QT_DEMO = "1"
  ```

Commit message:

README: update README
This commit is created to update README by:
- Add information about release tag name.
- Correct all information about codec/graphic packages.
- Add information about setting Realtime Linux.

Signed-off-by: hienhuynh <hien.huynh.px@renesas.com>

README.md, after:

# meta-renesas

This is a Yocto build layer(version:dunfell) that provides support for the RZ/G2 Group of 64bit Arm-based MPUs from Renesas Electronics.
Currently the following boards and MPUs are supported:

- Board: EK874 / MPU: R8A774C0 (RZ/G2E)
- Board: HIHOPE-RZG2M / MPU: R8A774A1 (RZ/G2M v1.3) and R8A774A3 (RZ/G2M v3.0)
- Board: HIHOPE-RZG2N / MPU: R8A774B1 (RZG2N)
- Board: HIHOPE-RZG2H / MPU: R8A774E1 (RZG2H)
- Board: RZG2L SMARC Evaluation Kit / MPU: R9A07G044L (RZ/G2L)
- Board: RZG2LC SMARC Evaluation Kit / MPU: R9A07G044C (RZ/G2LC)
- Board: RZG2UL SMARC Evaluation Kit / MPU: R9A07G043U (RZ/G2UL)
- Board: RZV2L SMARC Evaluation Kit / MPU: R9A07G054L (RZ/V2L)
- Board: RZV2L Development Evaluation Kit / MPU: R9A07G054L (RZ/V2L)

## Patches

To contribute to this layer you should email patches to renesas-rz@renesas.com. Please send .patch files as email attachments, not embedded in the email body.

## Dependencies

This layer depends on:

    URI: git://git.yoctoproject.org/poky
    layers: meta, meta-poky, meta-yocto-bsp
    branch: dunfell
    revision: bba323389749ec3e306509f8fb12649f031be152
    (tag: dunfell-23.0.14)
    (Need to cherry-pick a commit: git cherry-pick 9e444)

    URI: git://git.openembedded.org/meta-openembedded
    layers: meta-oe, meta-python, meta-multimedia
    branch: dunfell
    revision: ec978232732edbdd875ac367b5a9c04b881f2e19
    
    URI: http://git.yoctoproject.org/cgit.cgi/meta-gplv2/
    layers: meta-gplv2
    branch: dunfell
    revision: 60b251c25ba87e946a0ca4cdc8d17b1cb09292ac

    (Optional: core-image-qt)
    URI: https://github.com/meta-qt5/meta-qt5.git
    layers: meta-qt5
    revision: c1b0c9f546289b1592d7a895640de103723a0305

    (Optional: Docker)
    URI: https://git.yoctoproject.org/git/meta-virtualization
    layers: meta-virtualization
    branch: dunfell
    revision: c5f61e547b90aa8058cf816f00902afed9c96f72

## Build Instructions

Assume that $WORK is the current working directory.
The following instructions require a Poky installation (or equivalent).

Below git configuration is required:
```bash
    $ git config --global user.email "you@example.com"
    $ git config --global user.name "Your Name"
```

Download proprietary graphics and multimedia drivers from Renesas.
To download Multimedia and Graphics library and related Linux drivers, please use the following link:

    English: https://www.renesas.com/us/en/products/microcontrollers-microprocessors/rz-mpus/rzg-linux-platform/rzg-marketplace/verified-linux-package/rzg-verified-linux-package
    Japanese: https://www.renesas.com/jp/ja/products/microcontrollers-microprocessors/rz-mpus/rzg-linux-platform/rzg-marketplace/verified-linux-package/rzg-verified-linux-package

Please choose correct packages that matches with your MPU.
Graphic drivers are required for Wayland. Multimedia drivers are optional.
After downloading the proprietary package, please decompress them then put meta-rz-features folder at $WORK.

You can get all Yocto build environment from Renesas, or download all Yocto related public source to prepare the build environment as below.
```bash
    $ git clone https://git.yoctoproject.org/git/poky
    $ cd poky
    $ git checkout dunfell-23.0.14
    $ git cherry-pick 9e444
    $ cd ..
    $     
    $ git clone https://github.com/openembedded/meta-openembedded
    $ cd meta-openembedded
    $ git checkout ec978232732edbdd875ac367b5a9c04b881f2e19
    $ cd ..
    $    
    $ git clone https://git.yoctoproject.org/git/meta-gplv2
    $ cd meta-gplv2 
    $ git checkout 60b251c25ba87e946a0ca4cdc8d17b1cb09292ac
    $ cd ..
    $
    $ git clone  https://github.com/renesas-rz/meta-renesas.git
    $ cd meta-renesas
    $ git checkout <tag>
    $ cd ..
    $
    $ git clone  https://github.com/meta-qt5/meta-qt5.git
    $ cd meta-qt5
    $ git checkout -b tmp c1b0c9f546289b1592d7a895640de103723a0305
    $ cd ..
    $
    $ git clone  https://git.yoctoproject.org/git/meta-virtualization -b dunfell
    $ cd meta-virtualization
    $ git checkout c5f61e547b90aa8058cf816f00902afed9c96f72
    $ cd ..
```
\<tag\> can be selected in any tags of meta-renesas.
Now the latest version is **BSP-3.0.x** or **BSP-3.0.x-updatey** if any new updates are applied.

Initialize a build using the 'oe-init-build-env' script in Poky. e.g.:
```bash
    $ source poky/oe-init-build-env
```

Prepare default configuration files. :
```bash
    $ cp $WORK/meta-renesas/docs/template/conf/<board>/*.conf ./conf/
```
\<board\>: can be selected in any platforms:
* RZ/G2H:  hihope-rzg2h
* RZ/G2M:  hihope-rzg2m
* RZ/G2N:  hihope-rzg2n
* RZ/G2E:  ek874
* RZ/G2L:  smarc-rzg2l
* RZ/G2LC: smarc-rzg2lc
* RZ/G2UL: smarc-rzg2ul
* RZ/V2L:  smarc-rzv2l, rzv2l-dev

Build the target file system image using bitbake:
```bash
    $ bitbake core-image-<target>
```
\<target\>:bsp, weston, qt

After completing the images for the target machine will be available in the output
directory _'tmp/deploy/images/\<supported board name\>'_.

Images generated:
* Image (generic Linux Kernel binary image file)
* DTB for target machine
* core-image-\<target\>-\<machine name\>.tar.bz2 (rootfs tar+bzip2)
* core-image-\<target\>-\<machine name\>.ext4  (rootfs ext4 format)

## Build Instructions for SDK

Use bitbake -c populate_sdk for generating the toolchain SDK:
For 64-bit target SDK (aarch64):
```bash
    $ bitbake core-image-weston -c populate_sdk
```
The SDK can be found in the output directory _'tmp/deploy/sdk'_

    poky-glibc-x86_64-core-image-weston-aarch64-toolchain-x.x.sh

Usage of toolchain SDK: Install the SDK to the default: _/opt/poky/x.x_
For 64-bit target SDK:
```bash
    $ sh poky-glibc-x86_64-core-image-weston-aarch64-toolchain-x.x.sh
```
For 64-bit application use environment script in _/opt/poky/x.x_
```bash
    $ source /opt/poky/x.x/environment-setup-aarch64-poky-linux
```

## Build configs

It is possible to change some build configs as below:
* GPLv3: choose to not allow, or allow, GPLv3 packages
  * **Non-GPLv3 (default):** not allow GPLv3 license. All recipes that has GPLv3 license will be downgrade to older version that has alternative license (done by meta-gplv2). In this setting customer can ignore the risk of strict license GPLv3
  ```
  INCOMPATIBLE_LICENSE = "GPLv3 GPLv3+"
  ```
  * Allow-GPLv3: allow GPLv3 license. If user is fine with strict copy-left license GPLv3, can use this setting to get newer software version.
  ```
  #INCOMPATIBLE_LICENSE = "GPLv3 GPLv3+"
  ```
* CIP Core: choose the version of CIP Core to build with. CIP Core are software packages that are maintained for long term by CIP community. You can select the value "1" or "0" for CIP_CORE variable
  ```
  CIP_CORE = "1"
  ```
* QT Demo: choose QT5 Demonstration to build with core-image-qt. QT5 Demos are some applications to demonstrate QT5 framework.
  * Unset QT_DEMO (default): all QT5 Demos are not built with core-image-qt.
  ```
  #QT_DEMO = "1"
  ```
  * Allow QT_DEMO: all QT5 Demos are built and included in core-image-qt.
  ```
  QT_DEMO = "1"
  ```
* Realtime Linux: choose realtime characteristic of Linux kernel to build with. You can enable this feature by setting the value "1" to IS_RT_BSP variable in local.conf:
  ```
  IS_RT_BSP = "1"
  ```
